---
title: Cerecoxib & Inflammation
category: ideainfo
---

Recently, I have read a news from American Science Podcast, which is about the mosquito and flavivirus. It reminds me a report I wrote several years ago. The article is 

Celecoxib is a drug belonging to the non-steroid anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), including the well-known aspirin, ibuprofen, and naproxen (Figure 1A). In Taiwan, celecoxib can be purchase as the brand name Celebrex (Figure 1B). Due to its ability in anti-inflammatory, it is used in relieving pain such as the arthritis and painful menstruation. It was later found out that this effective painkiller could also be used in the treatment of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). However, given the side effects such as cardiovascular problems, there is no current medical recommendation to use this drug for cancer reduction. The effect of celecoxib as a potent anticancer drug will be discussed in this article; however, before the discussion, it is important to know the mechanism of the celecoxib as an anti-inflammatory drug and the relation between the inflammation pathway and cancer formation.

Celecoxib plays the role as an inhibitor of the cyclooxygenase (COX) in the inflammatory response. During the inflammation, the arachidonic acid, an important inflammatory intermediate which is the fatty acid chain freed from phospholipid, is catalyzed to prostaglandin H<sub>2</sub> (PGH<sub>2</sub>) by COX-1 or COX-2. The PGH<sub>2</sub> is then further converted to induce the downstream signaling pathway for inflammation. (Figure 2)

COX is officially known as prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase (PTGS). The enzyme is composed of two activity sites, with cyclooxygenase activity and peroxidase activity. (Figure 3) The main isoenzymes are known as COX-1 and COX-2, both forming in homodimer. Though catalyzing in similar fashion, they play different biological roles in an individual. COX-1, expressed in several organs such as stomach and platelet, is considered as a housekeeping gene providing the basal level of prostaglandin (PG) to maintain the homeostasis in those tissues. For instance, PGs provided by COX-1 function to keep the integrity of the mucosal epithelium in stomach and to participate in platelet aggregation. On the other hand, most tissues do not normally express COX-2 constitutively. It is often induced during the inflammation; however, there are some exceptions such as the CNS and kidney. The celecoxib is a highly selective COX-2 inhibitor, whereas traditional NSAIDs, such as aspirin, inhibit both COX-1 and COX-2. Therefore, applying selective COX-2 inhibitor can resolve the problems of using aspirin leading to ulceration and inhibiting the hemostasis.

The first clinical evidence showing that NSAIDs could be useful in the prevention of cancer is in 1991, indicating that COX enzymes might play a role in colorectal tumorigenesis. After the discovery, many reports indicated that the increasing levels of COX-2 and PGE<sub>2</sub> , derived from PGH<sub>2</sub>, were highly associated in many tumors. Nowadays, it is known that the COX-2/PGE<sub>2</sub> signal pathway is able to support the tumor cell in acquiring many capabilities during cancer development, including the evasion of apoptosis, self-sufficiency in growth signals, sustaining angiogenesis and trapping cells in stem cell-like state.

The normal cells in multicellular organisms are under the control of different signaling pathways. The over-expressed PGE<sub>2</sub> by COX-2 is able to disturb the two major pathways frequently mutated in many human cancers: the Ras-signaling pathway and PI3K/Akt-signaling pathway. Therefore, even under the conditions of hypoxia, PGE<sub>2</sub> appears to promote cell survival in tumor cells such as colorectal tumor. Moreover, some experiments showed that by using alternative mechanisms, the aberrant COX-2/PGE<sub>2</sub> signaling in the cells is still able to promote the cell proliferation after introducing the mutations in Ras- and PI3K/Akt-signaling pathways,. In conclusion, the COX-2/PGE<sub>2</sub> pathway is able to support the tumor cells by evading apoptosis and self-sufficient in growth signals.

It is believed that the initiation of many colorectal tumors appears in the perturbation of APC/β-catenin pathway (also known as WNT-signaling pathway). The continuous activation of β-catenin prevents the cells from the differentiation. Recent studies showed that the COX-2/PGE<sub>2</sub> pathway could also activate the β-catenin, supporting the cells to retain a stem cell-like phenotype.

In cancer development, the angiogenic switch serves as a rate-limiting step. The up-regulation of COX-2 expression level in colon cancer cells induces the angiogenic factors such as VEGF, bFGF, and CXCL-1, which serves to recruit circulating endothelial precursor cells (EPCs) for angiogenesis. Furthermore, the over-expressed of COX-2 in intestinal cells can increase the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity, which helps the cancer cells to perform metastasis.

Those acquiring capabilities supported by the over-activation of COX-2/PGE<sub>2</sub> pathway illustrate the mechanism of celecoxib in cancer reduction by selectively inhibiting the COX-2 in cancer cells. However, some evidence showed that COX-2-independent mechanisms might exist in the cancer reduction by COX-2 inhibitor. For example, some celecoxib analogs that lack COX-2 inhibitory function were still able to inhibit the growth of cancer cells. It is still not clear what mechanism lies behind the complex signaling network driven by COX-2/PGE<sub>2</sub> pathway.

Even though the celecoxib has a great potential in anticancer treatment, some serious side effects are caused by the chemical. One important issue is the rate of cardiovascular problems increased by COX-2 inhibitors. Vioxx was the brand name of rofecoxib, another COX-2 inhibitor provided by Merck and approved by FDA in 1999. However, several studies showed that the Vioxx not only relieve the arthritis pain, but also increase the cardiovascular problems. The drawbacks of rofecoxib forced Merck to withdraw the Vioxx from the market in 2004. It was mentioned above that the derivatives of PGs can induce many signaling pathways by binding to different receptors. Two derivatives, prostaglandin I<sub>2</sub> (PGI<sub>2</sub> , also known as prostacyclin) and thromboxane-A<sub>2</sub> (TXA<sub>2</sub> ) are related to the cardiovascular system.

PGI<sub>2</sub> and TXA<sub>2</sub> have the opposite effect in maintaining the vascular homeostasis. PGI<sub>2</sub> is synthesis from PGH<sub>2</sub> by prostacyclin synthase, while thromboxane A synthase catalyzed the production of TXA<sub>2</sub> from PGH<sub>2</sub>. TXA<sub>2</sub> synthesized mainly in platelets, which expressed only COX-1, serves as a stimulus for platelet aggregation and a vasoconstrictor. On the other hand, PGI<sub>2</sub> is an important intermediate during inflammation response. It is able to inhibit the aggregation of platelet and to induce the vasodilation (Figure 4). Though the information, we can realize that the ratio of PGI<sub>2</sub>/TXA<sub>2</sub> is an important parameter for vascular homeostasis. Therefore, applying the selective COX-2 inhibitor may result in increasing the risk of thrombosis.

This article has briefly covered the mechanism and the effect of celecoxib. As an inhibitor of COX-2, it is able to play an important role in anti-inflammation. In addition, the celecoxib represents as a potent anticancer drug because the COX-2/PGE<sub>2</sub>-signaling pathway is considered as a critical supplement for cancer development, including promoting the survival and the proliferation of the cells. By enhancing the level of β -catenin, the COX-2-derived PGE<sub>2</sub> retains the stem cell-like phenotype of tumor cells. Moreover, by increasing the angiogenic factor and the activity of MMPs, the COX-2/PGE<sub>2</sub> pathway helps the cancer cells in angiogenesis and invasion. However, due to its selective inhibition of COX-2, celecoxib disturbs several physiological balances in human. As a result, it induces some serious side effects such as increasing the rate of cardiovascular problems.
